---
layout: post
title: Chippy8 - A Chip8 Emulator in Javascript
---

Skip the rambling and take a look at the Chip8 emulator I wrote in Javascript.

[>> Demo <<](https://narwhaldisco.github.io/Chippy8/)

and take a look at the [source](https://github.com/narwhaldisco/Chippy8).

  I've always been interested in building an emulator from scratch. I remember as a kid using a Gameboy Color emulator to play Link's Awakening and being unable to sleep because I was so excited to play more. 15 odd years later I was trapped inside due to COVID-19 with nothing better to do and wanted to take a crack at creating an emulator. Starting with the Gameboy seemed a bit ambitious so I did some research and compromised on the [Chip8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8), an ancient virtual machine from the 70s which seems to be a rite of passing in the emudev community.

  I chose Javascript because I knew essentially none, having not used it since the single project I did in University a few years ago. Javascript also provided an easy way to share the finished project with my friends and family.

  Next I needed a mentor, and of all the guides and writeups and blogs I found Tania Rascia's [Writing an Emulator in JavaScript (and Interfacing with Multiple UIs)](https://www.taniarascia.com/writing-an-emulator-in-javascript-chip8/) to be the easiest to digest for a novice of both emudev and Javascript. Seriously, this article and the backing repo was essential to getting this project off the ground. You'll notice no shortage of similarities between Tania's emulator and mine and I will admit I copied and pasted more than a few times (but usually self-commented or at least understood what it did!).

  The first step to building a Chip8 emulator was understanding the architecture of the (virtual) machine. Before I started I already had a working knowledge of how a CPU works, fetch-decode-execute and even some of the more advance features of modern CPUs, but the Chip8 is really a simple little machine. You'll almost always want to start from a technical document, and look no further than [Cowgod's Chip-8 Technical Reference](http://devernay.free.fr/hacks/chip8/C8TECH10.HTM).

  From Cogwod's technical reference we can see that the Chip8 has 15 8bit general purpose registers, a single flag register, a 32x64 display that it can draw to directly, 2 timers, a 16bit instruction size and around 35 opcodes. What's more interesting is what it doesn't have, and that's any standard operating frequency or any memory mapped I/O. I guess that's because the Chip8 is only a virtual machine, there is no original hardware to model this after. It's up to the interpreter to choose how to interact with the display and keyboard.

  With this basic knowledge in mind, I could start with the boilerplate code.

```
  var opcode = this.fetch();

  this.instruction = this.decode(opcode);

  this.execute(this.instruction);
```
